Let's start with
something really simple,
just a hello world
application to get you going.
So that will print a string
to the screen, and that's it.
A Fortran programme
is just a text file.
So you can use any editor
who want to create it.
I'll be using vim because
that's my favourite,
and I'm most familiar with it.
So vim hello_world.f90 The
extension .f90 just tells
the editor and the compiler
that you're doing Fortran.
OK.
So a Fortran programme always
starts with program followed
by the name.
Let's call it hello_world.
And at the end, there is an
end program and optionally
hello_world.
But it's good practise
to put it there.
OK.
So we want to print a
string to the screen.
And for that, we use
a print statement.
The first thing we need
to specify is the format.
But we're happy with the
default formatting, which
is done by the Fortran runtime.
And we can just put an asterisk
and then what we want to print
and this basically is a string.
Strings in Fortran are
enclosed in single quotes
or double quotes.
You can choose.
Personally, I prefer
single quotes.
So this is the string which
we want to put on the screen.
OK.
We're done.
We save the file, and we go
back to the command line.
And now we can compile our code.
For this, we need a
compiler, because a compiler
will convert our source
code into an executable.
Let's called the
executable hello_world.exe.
And of course, we specify
the name of the source file
which we want to compile.
So the -o simply specifies the
name of the executable which is
created by the compiler
based on the source file,
hello_world.f90.
OK.
It's done, and we can run it.
And as you can see,
we get the string
which we wanted
printed to the screen.
So let's move back to the
editor and change the code
a little bit.
What we want to do is to
introduce a variable that holds
our message to make the
programme a little bit more
general.
So we introduce a variable, and
the type of that is character.
And that will hold string
data if we specify a length.
And the length can
be anything, but it
should be sufficient to
hold our entire string.
And let's just make that,
to be on the safe side, 20
characters.
OK.
Then we have a
double colon and then
the names of the
variable of that type,
so in this case, message.
And we can initialize
that to the string which
you want to print,
so hello world
or hello Fortran in this case.
OK.
Now, this is
actually a constant,
so we can make that explicit by
adding the parameter attribute.
OK.
Now we place our string
with the variable.
And we're ready to compile.
So we save and we go
back to the command line.
We compile the code.
That works.
And we run our application.
Not quite-- so rather
than hello Fortran,
we actually get 124 whatever.
So something is
definitely wrong here.
Let's move back to the editor.
So the one thing which is good
practise is to add implicit
none to the compilation
unit, such as the program.
And let's do that first.
So the idea is that if
you use implicit none,
each and every variable which
you use in your programme must
be declared explicitly.
So let's just save and see
what compiler tells us now.
So when we compile the
code, you see that now we
get an error message.
And the error says symbol
massage at the indicated line
is not explicitly declared.
So it has no implicit type.
And it's even
helpful, and it says,
did you actually mean message?
Yes, of course.
That was what I
meant, and massage
might have been subconscious
wishful thinking on my part.
So let's move back to the editor
again and fix the problem which
is, of course, easy enough.
And compile and
run the code again.
And now, of course, everything's
fine, and it works as expected.
So when you learn a new
programming language,
getting familiar with
the error messages
the compiler generates
is a quite useful skill.
So we did something
quite simple here.
And I promise that this
is about in the last video
where you actually
see me typing.
But now, let's move on to
some more exciting stuff.